Coursework- Part 1: Security of an OS- File System Security

high-level description of the security features of an OS file system

This report will explore four modern security features found in Microsoft Windows that help secure the file system. These features will also be compared to similar features in macOS. Lastly, the effects these features have on developers will also be reviewed.
An operating system (OS) may implement many security features to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the file system. Each operating system may have its methods of protecting the file system, but they should all attempt to achieve the core security features detailed by S TANENBAUM, ANDREW Bos, Herbert (2015) in the book “Modern Operating Systems”.
Access control can be used to restrict or limit user's and programme's access to files. (Chapter 11, p.796). Permissions are a type of access control that is commonly used by operating systems to determine who can use a file or directory and how. (Chapter 10, p.932)
Authentication is used to verify a user or process and prevent unauthorised access to a file system, usually through the use of passwords or keys. (Chapter 9. P.729)
Encryption in a file system can transform data on a disk at rest or in transit to an unreadable form and protect the confidentiality of file systems. (Chapter 9, p.724)
File tampering can be detected by comparing the file's original checksum with its new checksum at regular intervals. (Chapter 9, p.778)
How Microsoft Windows OS provides file system security

Access control has been seen in Microsoft Windows operating systems as far back as 1996 with the release of Windows NT 4.0 (Microsoft, 2021). It is still present in Microsoft Windows 10 and later. It is used after a user has authenticated to a system to determine the resources they have access to. Microsoft Windows uses ACLs to protect system objects, including files. Unique security identifiers (SIDs) are used to assign file permissions, including read, write, and execute to users and groups. The operating system completes an access control check to determine the SIDs for users and groups (Microsoft, 2023a).
Typical password authentication is only as secure as the user’s password, so other forms of authentication are necessary for better security. Released with Windows 10 in 2015, and still available within Windows 11, Microsoft gives the option to replace passwords with Windows Hello. Windows Hello is a biometric authentication system that enables users to sign in to their Windows systems without entering a password by scanning their face, fingerprint, or iris. Since it is more difficult to copy a user's biometric data than it is to guess or steal their password, this function adds a degree of security (Microsoft, 2023f).
Full hard drive encryption is provided within Windows 10 and 11, including newer versions of Windows servers from 2016. Full drive encryption is provided by Bitlocker, a Microsoft technology that automatically encrypts hard drives by using the cryptographic capabilities of the hardware. Bitlocker uses Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) to encrypt data. Two keys are used for encryption and decryption, and they never leave the hard drive, preventing the risk of keys being misplaced or stolen (note these are not public and private keys as AES is symmetric). An authentication key (AK) is stored as a hash on the drive and is used to decrypt the DEK (Microsoft, 2023b).
Modern Windows OS do not use checksums as a primary method to prevent file tampering as discussed in the book “Modern Operating Systems”. However, newer versions of Windows OS include a security feature called Controlled Folder Access (CFA). CFA was released with Windows 10 version 1709 and is still available in Windows 11. CFA allows administrators to define which folders on their system can be modified by trustworthy apps, which helps avoid file tampering. The OS Monitors the file system for modifications to protected folders and examines the actions of programmes that try to change those files (Microsoft, 2023c).
Comparison of Windows OS security features and Mac OS alternative

MacOS does include ACLs within their operating systems (Apple, 2019), however, they are not used for the file system like Windows OS ACLs. The most similar feature to Windows’ ACLs is Mandatory Access Control (MAC). MAC has become very popular in macOS since the release of version 10.14 (Eskimo and Apple, 2023). The main functionality of MAC is to limit a program's access to files, folders, full disks, and data vaults.
Touch ID is Apple’s implementation of fingerprint recognition, like Windows Hello. Touch ID was first implemented in 2016 in the release of macOS Sierra. It is a biometric feature that allows users to authenticate to their system without a password (Apple, 2023). Touch ID cannot be used to directly protect individual files and folders, however, it can be used with FileVault to provide similar results.
FileVault was introduced by Apple in 2003 within macOS X 10.3 and is still present in the newest version of the OS. FileVault uses XTS-AES 128 encryption to encrypt the hard drive, which is a variant of AES that is used in Windows Bitlocker that has been modified to support Mac hardware architecture. The hardware encryption engine of FileVault decrypts the encryption key using the user's login password or recovery key (Apple, 2022b). FileVault may also encrypt individual files, unlike Bitlocker.
When it comes to ensuring file integrity of critical system files, macOS uses a feature called “System Integrity Protection” (SIP). SIP was introduced in macOS 10.11, and is very similar to CFA found in modern Windows operating systems. SIP works by preventing other users and processes from changing protected files and directories, such as system-level files, system binaries, and kernel extensions (Apple, 2022a). The key difference between both implementations is that SIP applies to all system files and directories, whereas CFA Is user-defined.
The effects that the listed security features have on application developers.

Access Control Lists are a fundamental part of the Windows security model. These lists may restrict an application's access to files and folders, which may affect how software developers create their programmes. Developers might need to check that their programmes have the right permissions to access protected files or directories.
Windows Hello feature can impact application development if an application relies on user authentication. Developers may need to integrate Windows Hello into their software to provide a more secure, compatible, and user-friendly authentication experience. This may require API knowledge to implement.
BitLocker and Personal Drive Encryption encrypt the contents of hard drives and other storage devices to protect user data from unauthorised access. Application developers may need to consider how their software interacts with encrypted drives and how it handles data encryption and decryption. For example, an application may need to be modified to work with encrypted drives or use encryption libraries that are compatible with BitLocker and Personal Drive Encryption.
Controlled Folder Access restricts access to certain folders and can prevent unauthorised modifications to protected files. Application developers may need to ensure that their software can access the necessary files and folders while complying with the security restrictions put in place by Controlled Folder Access. False positives generated by CFA also need to be considered and avoided.
In general, the security features in Windows can have a significant impact on application development, as they introduce an extra layer of complexity. Developers may need to modify their software or take additional security precautions to ensure that it can function correctly and securely in the Windows environment.
Conclusion
In conclusion, protecting the file system of an operating system is vital to ensure confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Microsoft Windows OS provides several security features, such as Access Control Lists, biometric authentication through Windows Hello, full hard drive encryption using Bitlocker, and Controlled Folder Access which cover the core security features discussed. Similar features are also present in macOS, which strengthens the argument that the security features in this report are essential to modern operating systems.
Other recommendations for improving the security of OS file systems may include:
-	Using multi-factor authentication, such as time-based codes or hardware keys adds a degree of security.
-	Trusted Platform Module (TPM) can be used to protect the file system in modern operating systems. TPM is a hardware security module that provides secure storage of cryptographic keys and other sensitive data (Microsoft, 2023d).
-	Auditing can be used to track and record access to files and directories. This can help to identify any unauthorised access or modifications to files.
-	User Account Control (UAC) is a security feature in Windows that helps prevent unauthorised changes to the file system by prompting the user for permission before allowing any potentially harmful actions (Microsoft, 2023e).
-	Do integrity checks regularly. To identify file tampering, compute a checksum for each file in the file system.
A fine balance between advanced security features and KISS principles is needed to protect modern file systems. Although multiple advanced techniques may be used to protect file systems, it’s important not to make the system too difficult for users and application developers.


References
Apple (2019) Access Control Lists. Apple Developer Documentation Available at: https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/keychain_services/access_control_lists/ (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Apple (2022a) About System Integrity Protection on your Mac. Apple Support Available at: https://support.apple.com/en-gb/HT204899 (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Apple (2022b) Encrypt Mac data with FileVault. Apple Support Available at: https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/mac-help/mh11785/13.0/mac/13.0 (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Apple (2023) Use Touch ID on Mac. Apple Support Available at: https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/mac-help/mchl16fbf90a/mac (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Eskimo and Apple (2023) On File System Permissions. On File System Permissions | Apple Developer Forums Available at: https://developer.apple.com/forums/thread/678819/ (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Microsoft (2021) Microsoft Support. Available at: https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/topic/client-service-and-program-issues-can-occur-if-you-change-security-settings-and-user-rights-assignments-0cb6901b-dcbf-d1a9-e9ea-f1b49a56d53a (Accessed: February 23, 2023).
Microsoft (2023a) Access Control Overview. Microsoft Learn Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/identity-protection/access-control/access-control (Accessed: February 23, 2023).
Microsoft (2023b) BitLocker. Microsoft Learn Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/information-protection/bitlocker/bitlocker-overview (Accessed: February 27, 2023).
Microsoft (2023c) Protect important folders from ransomware from encrypting your files with controlled folder access. Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-365/security/defender-endpoint/controlled-folders?view=o365-worldwide (Accessed: March 1, 2023).
Microsoft (2023d) Trusted Platform Module Technology Overview. Microsoft Learn Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/information-protection/tpm/trusted-platform-module-overview (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Microsoft (2023e) User Account Control (Windows). (Windows) | Microsoft Learn Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/identity-protection/user-account-control/user-account-control-overview (Accessed: March 2, 2023).
Microsoft (2023f) Windows Hello for Business Overview (Windows). (Windows) | Microsoft Learn Available at: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/security/identity-protection/hello-for-business/hello-overview (Accessed: March 1, 2023).
S TANENBAUM, A. and Bos, H. (2015) Modern operating systems.

